**Overview:**

The public school system in New York City has been facing immense scrutiny for its lackluster student performance. To substantiate whether these claims can be supported by public educational data, we sought out to measure the correlation between existing student support resources and student performance as defined by passing rates on annual statewide exams. Using the most recent data from the NYC Council, we created a metric score to assess the availability of student resources and regressed this score against student performance sectioned into quartiles based on the school’s overall economic need index. Ultimately, we found that the majority of resources did not show correlation with test performance, while the presence of art programs as well as gifted and talented programs showed minor correlation with higher test performance for schools in all economic situations. Interestingly however, a higher number of teachers and support staff did not correlate with higher student performance for schools in the lowest and highest quartiles, but did have a correlation for schools in the middle two quartiles.

**Research Question:**

Does the influx of additional in-school student support resources such as gyms, support staff, and art programs contribute to higher performance for students in grades 3-8 as measured by passing rates on statewide English and Math exams?
Furthermore, do specific support resources have a noticeable positive correlation with better test outcomes?

**Background & Prior Work:**

According to our background research, New York City’s public school system represents one of the most expansive and expensive educational programs in the United States, covering 2.6 million students and costing $34 billion annually as of 2020. On a per student basis, the city is spending $28,000 on each student, a record amount that exceeds second-place Boston’s $22,000 by over 20 percent. However, the educational results of this spending has been relatively lackluster, as the system consistently produces less than 50% proficiencies on English and Math state exams for students in grades 3-8. Specifically, in 2018 just 46.7 percent of students achieved proficient levels in English state exams and only 42.7 percent of students hit their marks in Math state exams. 

Prior research has been conducted over the past two decades on the deficiencies in NYC’s systematic approach toward funding education and has led to various reform efforts proposed by the city administration. As recent as 2014, Mayor Bill De Blasio implemented a new $800 million plan called the ‘Renewal Program’ to invest in student support resources at low-performing schools in an effort to boost test performance. Over the years, the program seemed to show little signs of promise; 14 of the 94 schools receiving funding from the program had closed and student performance remained stagnant. Further, in 2018, The Educational Trust published a press release titled “Large New York school districts are not doing enough to prioritize resources to the schools with the greatest needs” describing the failure to provide the level of resources required by the highest-need schools. A similar report out of Democrat and Chronicle proclaimed “Education funding in New York inequitable, inadequate”, noting that resources were not being spent in the correct places–namely community development and tax adjustments for low-income districts.

In juxtaposition to these pointed reports, however, a more neutral report published in The Washington Post acknowledged that expecting change after 3 years no matter how much money was infused into the schools was an unrealistic projection; real change takes time. Additionally, the program did demonstrate some positive direction, in that it considered in and out-of-school factors that affect learning, and connections between schools and communities. Nonetheless, the article noted that school resources have less of an impact on student achievement than out-of-school factors such as poverty. Policymakers have repeatedly overestimated their capacity to overcome factors such as housing insecurity, food insecurity, students’ parents’ employment insecurity and more by increasing investment on student support resources within the school network. To conclude, the article pointed to two possible realities for the education reform: ‘1. That education reform can be very helpful, if they’re the right ones and if we’re patient and committed; but 2. We as a society are deceiving ourselves if we think we’ll transform educational outcomes without addressing inequality.’ 

Based on our team members’ prior work in educational services, we believe both to be true, but that the latter point is much closer to the truth of the situation. Neglecting to address racism, discrimination, concentrated poverty, disinvestment, and disparate access to a variety of resources while focusing primarily on school resource investment will fail to create the desired positive educational outcome for all student demographics.

As a result of this widespread criticism from many educational experts and journalists, the Renewal Program was shuttered in 2019. Despite the lackluster results of this 4-year endeavor, De Blasio’s team announced an adjusted approach that remains committed to the same methodologies of investing in student support services at schools. Only now, any school is eligible, not just the schools identified as being low in performance. 

Our team fails to see how this “new” approach addresses the shortcomings of the previous approach as there is little to suggest that there will be a pivoted focus on underserved resources that were not developed by the Renewal Program. If the new program continues to neglect overarching community problems that heavily affect high-need students’ performance, then a logical assumption is that the outcomes will not be very different from the Renewal Program. 

Therefore, in our research, we wanted to look at the data provided by the city council to identify whether there is evidence that has influenced a continued commitment to this approach of investing in student support resources. Perhaps, an increase in student support resources has contributed to higher overall test performance and this information was unclear to the public. Further, if we do observe a measurable effect, we hope to identify specific resources that may have a positive relationship with higher student performance so as to provide a recommendation on how to better allocate school funding for potentially higher impact.

**References:**

https://www.washingtonpost.com/education/2019/01/07/new-york-city-offers-some-unpleasant-truths-about-school-improvement/
https://ny.chalkbeat.org/2019/2/26/21106894/new-york-city-ends-controversial-renewal-turnaround-program-but-the-approach-is-here-to-stay
https://newyork.edtrust.org/press-release/equal-is-not-the-same-as-equitable-large-new-york-school-districts-are-not-doing-enough-to-prioritize-resources-to-the-schools-with-the-greatest-needs/
https://www.democratandchronicle.com/story/news/education/2020/02/17/usccr-new-york-education-funding-inequitable-inadequate-foundation-aid/4737790002/
https://nypost.com/2019/05/21/nyc-spends-double-the-national-average-on-education-has-little-to-show-for-it/
https://www.nytimes.com/2018/10/26/nyregion/deblasio-school-renewal-bill.html
Hypothesis:

We believe that most in-school student support resources will not have a sizable correlation with student passing rate on annual statewide English and Math exams. Based on our prior research, in-school resources have seemingly little effect on student performance for those who are already behind. Rather, it is improvements for out-of-school experiences such as poverty and discrimination that will have a greater effect on test performance.

However, we predict that the number of support staff as well as gifted and talented programs will stand out as resources that positively correlate with increased test performance. This is because we believe support staff as well as gifted and talented programs contribute to better community development, given they improve general outlooks of education for student families.

**Dataset:**

Dataset Name: NYC School Explorer Data (2018)
Link to the dataset: https://council.nyc.gov/data/school-explorer/
Number of observations: 
This dataset is provided by the NYC Council, with the original intent of providing NYC parents information on where to send their children to school. Included here are data about school characteristics such as admissions, budget, and economic need; types of resources such as gyms, auditoriums and libraries; and summaries of test performance for students in grades 3-8 in each school. The data has 224 variables for each of the 836 schools, along with both categorical and numerical values, so it will require cleaning for our analysis purposes.

Data Cleaning:
Due to the large size and qualitative nature of the dataset, we performed extensive cleaning to prepare it for our analysis. First, we determined based on our intuition from background research the variables that could be relevant to our research. This reduced the dataframe to 39 columns from 224. Following this, we created a function to convert the binary categorical values of ‘yes’ and ‘no’ into numerical values of ‘1’ and ‘0’ to prepare it for sklearn. Then, we renamed the columns with longer descriptive titles to shorter titles to make it more convenient when we call the variables later. After this, we dropped the original columns to remove duplicates. Seeing as there were still categorical values for zoning rules and accessibility, we converted the respective values to a range of 0-2 and 0-3 respectively, with 0 being least accessible and 2-3 being most accessible. Again, we drop the duplicate columns after our conversation. At this stage, we noticed that there remained one more type of categorical value labeled ‘redacted for privacy concerns’. To address this, we converted those values to null. Then, after looking at the test scores, we noticed that we only had information about the percentage of students who passed a specific test, and the number of students passing, but no information about the percentage of total tests passed. Since we are using this variable to represent student performance in a school, we calculated this by creating an arithmetic function using the present variables. We assigned the passing percentage of total tests to a new column with the variable passtot. The final step for cleaning our general dataframe was removing special education schools and home schools from the list, leaving only general education schools. This is because we recognize that special education schools and home schools potentially have a different baseline of performance as well as resources, so we decided to only focus on general education schools because that represented the majority of schools. Further, this would remove the ability for special types of schools to skew our findings. Given more time, we may conduct another analysis on the other two types of schools. Following this step, our data was sufficiently cleaned for exploratory data analysis. 

**Data Analysis:**

We began our exploratory data analysis by first calculating measures of central tendencies for variables we were interested in such as economic need index and total funding by district. Of particular note here was that higher budget correlated strongly with higher numbers of staff. This may point to the fact that a large portion of the budget was spent on human resources. Since this information is not easily accessible publicly, this provided a meaningful context of how the budget is distributed. Another tidbit that was interesting was that the data showed that the district with the highest economic need index did not receive the most funding. This information matches our background research in that school funding was prioritized by enrollment first, need second. However, we question whether this makes sense if additional resources aren’t also being allocated to invest in the community. To break this down further, we created scatterplots to visualize the economic need index of all schools against total budget and the economic need index of all schools against their students’ passing rates. What we found was that there was no correlation between ENI and budget, and a strong negative correlation between ENI and test performance. This further demonstrated that there was inequity in the distribution of resources based on need and highlighted that there may be different baselines of performance for different economic need classes. This information suggested that in our final analysis and presentation of findings that it may be beneficial to split up schools based on their economic need index. To complete our exploratory data analysis, we created additional graphs to visualize the relationships between certain variables to make sure that we didn’t miss anything by simply looking at the numbers without checking the distribution. To inspect the pattern of economic need index for all schools, we created a distribution plot graph which had a strong negative skew, indicating that a vast majority of schools had a high economic index. To get more specific, we checked the distribution of economic need indexes within each district by creating a boxplot graph. This graph showed that some districts had higher variance in economic need, but also further affirming that a large number of districts had high economic need index. This suggests that using economic need index to split schools into groups for analysis may lead to more accurate results. Additionally, we created visualizations for total enrollment, total staffing, number of social workers, numbers of students in poverty, and total expense budget, which all showed similar positive skew in their distributions, affirming that all these school characteristics may be tied to each other. 

For our final stretch, we first created a dataframe called resources that only included the student resources from the general dataframe. Then, we divided the schools in our resource dataframe into quartiles by economic index using the 25th percentile, 25th-50th percentile, 50th-75th percentile, and 75th-99th percentile. Then within each quartile, we converted the values of our non-binary variables into percentile values relative to the values of that variable within the quartile. Thirdly, we created a function to calculate a metric score for resources by weighting all the variables evenly. Finally, we generated a correlation plot for each quartile to see which resources had a positive correlation to school test performance(passtot). This correlation also shows the correlation of our resource metric against test performance. 

To further visualize our findings, we created scatterplots to show the top 3 resources that correlated with test performance for each quartile, as well as a scatterplot that showed the relationship between resource scores and test performance.

A note: Although our metric used a non-scientific approach to determine the weights of the variables for our metric score, the concept of creating a metric is what we hope to emphasize here. In the future, we will look to use another set of data for student performance to determine weights so we can validly regress our metric against state test performance (total passing percentage).
  
**Conclusion & Discussion:**

After exploring the data and analyzing the relationship between student support resources and test performance for each quartile of schools separated by economic need index, we concluded that overall, student support resources had a very small relationship with student performance. 

Across the quartiles of schools, the correlation between our resource metric and test performance ranged from -0.03 to 0.065. This signals that student support resources as measured by our metric does not correlate strongly with higher test performance.

We did observe a pattern amongst the resources that had the highest correlation with test performance. Across all four quartiles, the presence of art programs spanning four disciplines, kindergarten gifted and talented programs, and general gifted and talented programs all had a measurable positive correlation with test performance. Four discipline art programs are defined as consisting of dance, visual arts, theater, and music classes. An interesting point to note is that for the middle two quartiles, the amount of total staff had a measurable positive correlation with test performance, however for the bottom and top quartiles, the amount of total staff had near no correlation.

The takeaway from this research is that in general, the presence of in-school resources in its current state are not significantly correlating with higher student test performance. This may suggest that resources are either not built sufficiently for the demographics they’re serving or that in-school resources cannot mitigate the effects of out-of-school factors. Further, it suggests that the investment into in-school support resources has potentially been an ineffective way of utilizing funding. Our analysis shows that for students in all economic need groups, the addition of most support resources have not improved student performance. Specifically, although a large portion of the budget for each school is spent on additional staff–that resource is not demonstrating an ability to improve test performance for students experiencing the highest need. 

In all, our research suggests that the new approach taken by Mayor De Blasio in which a prioritization on funding more student support resources may require additional consideration. Harking back to our background research, it may be more important to allocate those resources to fund community development to address out-of-school factors that are negatively affecting test performance for students in districts of highest need.

Ethics & Privacy:  There was data on ratios of underprivileged students as well as some dealing with minorities and disabilities in which it is possible that someone could determine which groups were where and act on a bias. Though a valid concernitis likely data required by the state for funding of ESL and special needs programs.On some level it is possible that between individual schools and districts that there are those excluded from these numbers. Without a third party this would be an avoidable bias should it exist. In addition, it is possible that some groups have no or under-representation as they are lumped into categories but nothing is done to directly serve or support them. ( An example is how students with dyslexia are often placed in special education courses and never given proper instruction) 

When discussing budgets and allocation of spending, there could be vested interest by specific school districts as well as members of administration. Throughout the project, the goal was to visualize what districts have at their disposal to positively impact student success and if there could be a correlation between the money a district receives and the success of the students. Should this report become public it’s possible that districts attempt to blindly replicate resources or programs in attempts to gain funding without ensuring that students' wellbeing is a priority. Furthermore, what works for one district or even a single school may not yield similar results elsewhere. In a more nefarious route some schools may even target 

Though this data is reported by the NYC city council, it is completely possible that they have already removed data or only put forth what they deem necessary. As stated on the website there are roughly 1.1million students in various NYC districts but the data provided only accounts for roughly half that many.

